in one hour Al Gore and George W Bush
will face off against each other for the
first time two men going 90 minutes in
front of a nationally televised audience
that may go as high as 90 million
viewers at some point during the hour
and a half coming as it does during an
interesting time in this race with our
MSNBC Reuters news agency Zogby tracking
poll showing Al Gore cracking through
the margin of error but just barely 46
to 40 against George W Bush good evening
to you I'm Brian Williams I am joined by
the host of hardball Chris Matthews
Chris Goetze let's get right to it
what is both guy have to do tonight in
this debate they have to play their
strengths as any politician has to end
they have to protect their weaknesses
the strengths for Al Gore are clear the
strongest American economy perhaps in
the history of the world he can brag
about that tonight as he's never done
before and it's a good time to do that
he can also take advantage of the
positions he's taken on issues which are
very popular prescription drugs for
senior citizens
college tuition tax credits for working
families who have kids in college very
strong stuff he can sell all that
tonight george w bush has got to sell
the fact that he's an entrepreneur he
believes in the free enterprise system
he's a Reaganite guy who believes the
government does not produce jobs the
private sector does I know you were
laughing during hardball tonight that
expectations for George W could not be
managed any lower by his surrogates I
believe that they put out a brilliant
spin tonight that the man is lucky to be
able to get through tonight without
drooling when in fact he's quite capable
of doing a spectacular performance
tonight anyone who spent any time with
George Bush knows he has one big
advantage over Al Gore Umbro cause our
coverage continues
[Music]
from NBC News decision 2000 the
presidential debates
from the University of Massachusetts in
Boston
here is Tom Brokaw
good evening everyone I'm here with my
colleague our Washington bureau chief a
moderator of Meet the Press Tim Russert
and Tim on that stage right behind us
tonight Texas Governor George W Bush and
Vice President Al Gore will meet in the
first of three debates between now and
Election Day and that's just five weeks
away when they walk onto that stage
momentarily the Vice President and the
governor will be facing 90 minutes of
questions and rebuttals before a
national television audience and an
audience of their family and invited
guests in this hall we're told the Ralph
Nader the Green Party presidential
candidate has been attempting to get in
here tonight on a ticket that may have
been given to him about a student we
don't know whether that's been resolved
yet the candidates their handlers
pundits and kibitzers of all stripes
have been attempting to raise
expectations lower them second-guess
them and prejudge the outcome the fact
is that we don't know at this point and
when it's over you will be the judge
especially those of you who still have
not settled on a candidate the
candidates have spent the weekend doing
dress rehearsals with their advisers and
family going through mock debates trying
to out trying out outlines and
second-guessing the opposition the
moderator questioners are tonight Jim
Lehrer of PBS the highly respected host
to the NewsHour good evening from the
Clark Athletic Center at the University
of Massachusetts in Boston I'm Jim
Lehrer of the NewsHour on PBS and I
welcome you to the first of three
90-minute debates between the Democratic
candidate for president Vice President
Al Gore and the Republican candidate
governor george w bush of texas the
debates are sponsored by the Commission
on Presidential Debates
and they will be conducted within
formats and rules agreed to by the
Commission and the two campaigns
tonight's will have the candidates at
podiums no answer to a question can
exceed two minutes rebuttals are limited
to one minute but as moderator I have
the option to follow up and to extend
any particular give and take another
three and a half minutes but even then
no single answer can exceed two minutes
the candidates under their rules may not
question each other directly there will
be no opening statements but each
candidate may have up to two minutes for
a closing statement
the questions and the subjects were
chosen by me
alone I have told no one from the two
campaigns or the Commission or anyone
else involved what they are there's a
small audience in the hall tonight they
are not here to participate only to
listen I have asked and they have agreed
to remain silent for the next 90 minutes
except for right now when they will
applaud as we walk on the two candidates
governor Bush and Vice President Gore
and now the first question as determined
by a flip of a coin it goes to Vice
President Gore Vice President Gore you
have questioned whether governor Bush
has the experience to be President of
the United States what exactly do you
mean well Jim first of all I would like
to thank the sponsors of this debate and
the people of Boston for hosting the
debate I'd like to thank Governor bush
for participating and I'd like to say
I'm happy to be here with the tipper and
our family I have actually not
questioned governor Bush's experience I
have questioned his proposals and here's
why I think this is a very important
moment for our country we have achieved
extraordinary prosperity and in this
election America has to make an
important choice will we use our
prosperity to enrich not just the few
but all of our families I believe we
have to make the right and responsible
choices if I'm entrusted with the
presidency here are the choices that I
will make I'll balance the budget every
year I will pay down the national debt I
will put Medicare and Social Security in
a lockbox and protect them and I will
cut taxes for middle-class families I
believe it's important to resist the
temptation to squander our surplus if we
make the right choices we can have a
prosperity that endures and enriches all
of our people if I'm entrusted with the
presidency I will help parents and
strengthen families because you know if
we have prosperity that grows and grows
we still won't be successful unless we
strengthen families by for example
ensuring that children can always go to
schools that are safe by giving parents
the tools to protect their children
against cultural pollution I will make
sure that we invest in our country and
our families and I mean investing in
education health care the environment
and middle-class tax cuts and retirement
security that's my agenda and that's why
I think that it's not just a question of
experience governor Bush one-minute
rebuttal well we do come from different
places and I come from West Texas I've
been a governor the governor is the
chief executive officer and learns how
to set agendas and I think you're gonna
find the difference reflected in our
budgets I want to take 1/2 of the
surplus and dedicate it to Social
Security 1/4 of the surplus for
important projects and I want to send
1/4 of the surplus back to the people
who pay the bills
I want everybody who pays taxes to have
their tax rates cut and that stands in
contrast to my worthy opponents plan
which will increase the size of
government dramatically his plan is
three times larger than President
Clinton's proposed plan eight years ago
it's a plan that will have 200 new
programs as well our expanded programs
it will create 20,000 new bureaucrats in
other words it empowers Washington and
tonight you're going to hear that my
passion and my vision is to empower
Americans to be able to make decisions
for themselves in their own lives so I
take it about your answer then mr. vice
president in your an interview recently
with the New York Times when you said
that you questioned whether or not vice
president Governor Bush was experienced
enough to be President you were talking
about strictly policy differences yes
Jim I said that his tax cut plan for
example raises the question of whether
it's the right choice for the country
and let me give you an example of what I
mean
under governor Bush's tax cut proposal
he would spend more money on tax cuts
for the wealthiest 1% than all of the
new spending that he proposes for
education health care prescription drugs
and national defense all combined now I
think those are the wrong priorities now
under under my proposal for every dollar
that I proposed in spending for things
like education and health care I will
put another dollar into middle-class tax
cuts and for every dollar that I spend
in those two categories
I'll put $2 toward paying down the
national debt I think it's very
important to keep the debt going down
and completely eliminate it and I also
think it's very important to go to the
next stage of welfare reform our country
has cut the welfare rolls in half I've
fought hard from my days in the Senate
and as vice president to cut the welfare
rolls and we've moved millions of people
in America into good jobs but it's now
time for the next stage of welfare
reform and include father's and not only
mothers we're going to get to a lot of
those yes go ahead well let me just say
that obviously tonight we're gonna hear
some phony numbers about what I think
and what we ought to do people need to
know that over the next ten years is
going to be twenty five trillion dollars
of revenue that comes into our treasury
we anticipate spending 21 trillion and
my plan says why don't we pass 1.3
trillion of that back to the people who
pay the bill surely we can afford 5% of
the 25 trillion dollars that are coming
to the treasury to the hardworking
people who pay the bills there's a
difference of opinion my opponent thinks
the government it's the surplus is the
government's money that's not what I
think I think it's a hard-working people
in America's money and I want to share
some of that money with you
so you've got more money to build and
save and dream for your families that's
a difference of opinion different
government making decisions for you and
you're getting more of your money to
make decisions for yourself Jim let me
just follow up one quick question when
when you have experience but so do I and
I've been the chief executive officer
the second biggest state in the Union
I've had a proud record of working in
both Republicans and Democrats which is
what our nation needs we need somebody
who can come up to Washington and say
look let's forget all the politics and
all the finger-pointing and get some
positive things done on Medicare and
prescription drugs and so
security and so I take him first word
Jim if I could just quickly need to move
on yes I know that the governor used the
phrase phony numbers but if you if you
look at the plan and add the numbers up
these numbers are correct he spends more
money for tax cuts for the wealthiest 1%
and all of his new spending proposals
for health care prescription drugs
education and national defense all
combined I agree that the surplus is the
American people's money it's your money
that's why I don't think we should give
nearly half of it to the wealthiest 1%
because the other 99% have had an awful
lot to do with building this surplus in
our prosperity our three and a half
minutes is up new question oh that's
about wealthy people governor Bush you
have question this is a companion
question to the question I asked vice
president ok
you have questioned whether Vice
President Gore has demonstrated the
leadership qualities necessary to be
President of the United States
what do you mean here's what I've said
I've said Jim I've said that eight years
ago they campaigned on prescription
drugs for seniors and four years ago
they campaigned on getting prescription
drugs for seniors and now they're
campaigning on getting prescription
drugs for seniors it seems like they
can't get it done now they may blame
other folks but it's time to get
somebody in Washington who's gonna work
with both Republicans and Democrats to
get some positive things done when it
comes to our seniors and so what I've
said is is there's been some missed
opportunities they've had a chance
they've had a chance to form consensus
I've got a plan on Medicare for example
this two-stage plan that says we're
gonna have immediate help for seniors
and what I call immediate helping hand a
48 billion dollar program but I also
want to say the seniors if you're happy
with Medicare the way it is fine you can
stay in the program but we're gonna give
you additional choices just like they
give federal employees and the federal
employee health plan federal employees
I've got a variety of choices from which
to choose so should seniors and my point
has been
as opposed to politicizing an issue like
Medicare in other words holding it up is
an issue hoping somebody bites and then
try to clobber them over the head with
it for political purposes this year in
the year 2000 it's time to say let's get
it done once and for all and that's what
I have been critical about the
administration for Sam and Social
Security I think there was a good
opportunity to bring Republicans and
Democrats together to reform the Social
Security system so the seniors will
never go without those on Social
Security today will have their promise
made but also to give younger workers
the option at their choice being able to
manage some of their own money and the
private sectors to make sure there's a
social security system around tomorrow
there's a lot of young workers that are
rallies we go to that when they hear
that I'm going to trust them at their
option to be able to manage under
certain guidelines some of their own
money to get a better rate of return so
that they'll have a retirement plan the
future they begin to nod their heads and
they want a different attitude in
Washington one-minute rebuttal well Jam
under my plan all seniors will get
prescription drugs under Medicare the
governor is described Medicare as a
government HMO it's not and let me
explain the difference under the
Medicare prescription drug proposal I'm
making here's how it works you go to
your own doctor and your doctor chooses
your prescription and no HMO or
insurance company can take those choices
away from you then you go to your own
pharmacy you fill the prescription and
Medicare pays half the cost if you're in
a very poor family or if you have very
high costs Medicare will pay all the
costs a $25 premium and much better
benefits that you could possibly find in
the private sector now here's the
contrast 95 percent of all seniors would
get no help whatsoever under my opponent
for the first four or five years now one
thing I don't understand Jim is why is
it that the wealthiest 1% get their tax
cuts the first year but 95 percent of
seniors have to wait four to five years
before they get a single penny together
I guess my answer to that is
the man's running on mediscare trying to
frighten people enough in the voting
booth that's just not the way I think
and that's just not my intentions it's
not my plan
I want all seniors have prescription
drugs in Medicare we need to reform
Medicare there have been an opportunity
to do so but this administration has
failed to do it and so seniors are gonna
have not only a Medicare plan where the
poor senior I have the prescription
drugs played paid for but there will be
a variety of options the current system
today has meant a lot for a lot of
seniors and I really appreciate the the
intentions of the current system and as
I mentioned if you're happy with the
system you can stay in it but there's a
lot of procedures that have not kept up
in Medicare with with the current times
there's no prescription drug benefits
there's no drug therapies there's no
preventing medicines there's no vision
care I mean we need to have a modern
system to help seniors in the idea of
supporting a federally controlled
132,000 page document bureaucracy as
being a compassionate way for seniors is
and the only compassionate source of
care for seniors is just not my vision I
believe we ought to give seniors more
options I believe we ought to make the
system work better but I know this I
know it's gonna require a different kind
of leader to go to Washington to say to
both Republicans and Democrats let's
come together you've had your chance a
vice president you've been there for
eight years and nothing has been done
and my point is is that my plan not only
trusts seniors with options my plan sets
aside three point four trillion dollars
from Medicare over the next ten years my
plan also says it's gonna require a new
approach in Washington DC it's gonna
require somebody who can work across the
partisan divide if I could respond to
that
Jim month under my plan I will put
Medicare in an ironclad lockbox and
prevent the money from being used for
anything other than Medicare the
governor has declined to endorse that
idea even though the Republican as well
as Democratic leaders of Congress have
endorsed it I'd be interested if this
each if he would this evening say that
he would put Medicare in a lockbox I
don't think he will because under his
plan if you work out the numbers
a hundred billion dollars comes out of
Medicare just for the wealthiest 1% in
the tax cut now here is the difference
some people who say the word reform
actually mean cuts under the governor's
plan if you kept the same
fee-for-service that you have now under
Medicare your premiums would go up by
between eighteen and forty seven percent
and that's the study of the
Congressional plan that he's modeled his
proposal on by the Medicare actuaries
let me just give you one quick example
there's a man here tonight named George
McKinney from Milwaukee he's 70 years
old he has high blood pressure his wife
has heart trouble they they have income
of twenty five thousand dollars a year
they cannot pay for their prescription
drugs and so they're some of the ones
that go to Canada regularly in order to
get their prescription drugs under my
plan half of their cost would be paid
right away under Governor Bush's plan
they would get not one penny for four to
five years and then they would be forced
to go into an HMO or to an insurance
company and ask them for coverage but
there'd be no limit on the premiums or
the deductibles or any of the terms and
conditions III cannot let this go by the
old-style Washington politics we're
going to scare you in the voting booth
under my plan the man gets immediate
help with prescription drugs it's called
a mediate helping hand instead of
squabbling and finger-pointing he gets
immediate help let me let me say
something and I understand they get
twenty five thousand dollars a year
income that makes them ineligible look
this is a man he's got great numbers he
talks about numbers I'm beginning to
think not only did he invent the
Internet but he invented the calculator
it's fuzzy math it's the scaring trying
to scare people and voting booth under
my tax plan that he continues to
criticize I set a third nother
government federal government should
take more than no more than a third of
anybody's check but I also dropped the
bottom rate from 15 percent to 10
percent because by far the vast majority
the help goes to people at the bottom
the economic ladder if you're a family
of four in Massachusetts making $50,000
you get a 50% cut and the federal income
taxes you pay it's from four thousand to
about two thousand now the difference in
our plans is I want that two thousand to
go to you all right let me and the vice
president would like to be spending the
two thousand on your behalf
one quick thing gentlemen these are your
rules I'm doing my best view we're way
over the three and a half I have no
problems with it but we want it do you
want to have a quick responsible move on
we're already almost five minutes on
this yeah I mean it's just it's just
clear you can go to the website and look
if you make more than twenty five
thousand dollars a year you don't get a
penny of help under the Bush
prescription drug proposal for at least
four to five years and then you're
pushed into a Medicare into a an HMO or
an insurance company plan and there's no
limit on the premiums or the deductibles
or any of the conditions and the
insurance companies say it won't work
and they won't offer these plans let me
ask you about this we'll move on on this
subject as a practical matter both of
you want to bring prescription drugs to
seniors correct correct but difference
is the difference is I want to bring it
to a hundred percent all right and he
brings it only to five percent wait a
minutes just totally false for him to
stand up here and say that let me make
sure the seniors hear me loud and clear
they've had their chance to get
something done I'm gonna work with both
Republicans and Democrats to reform the
system all seniors will be covered all
poor seniors will have their
prescription drugs paid for in the
meantime we're gonna have a plan to help
for seniors and in the meantime could be
one year or two years okay I don't know
let me let me put call your attention to
the key word there he said all poor see
no wait a minute all seniors are covered
under prescription bursaries and my plan
in the first year if we can get it done
in the first year you bet yours is
phased in a no no no no no it's a
two-phase plan Jim and for the first
four years it takes a year to pass it
and then for the first four years only
the poor are covered middle class
seniors like George McKinney and his
wife are not covered I look forward to
five years I've got an idea
okay you have any more to say about this
you could say it in their closing
statements okay new question Vice
President Gore how would
you contrast your approach to preventing
future future oil price and supply
problems like we have now to the
approach of Governor Bush excellent
question and here's the here's a simple
difference my plan has not only a
short-term component but also a
long-term component and it focuses not
only on increasing the supply which I
think we have to do but also on working
on the consumption side now in in the
short term we have to to free ourselves
from the domination of the the big oil
companies that have the ability to
manipulate the price from OPEC when they
want to raise the price and in the long
term we have to give new incentives for
the development of domestic resources
like deep gas in the Western Gulf like
stripper wells for oil but also
renewable sources of energy and domestic
sources that are cleaner and better and
I'm proposing a plan that will give tax
credits and tax tax incentives for the
rapid development of new kinds of cars
and trucks and buses and factories and
boilers and furnaces that don't have as
much pollution that don't burn as much
energy and that help us get out on the
cutting edge of the new technologies
that will create millions of new jobs
because when we sell these new products
here will then be able to sell them
overseas and there's a ravenous demand
for them overseas now another big
difference is governor Bush is proposing
to open up our some of our most precious
environmental treasures like the Arctic
National Wildlife Refuge to the big oil
companies to go in and start producing
oil there I think that is the wrong
choice it would only give us a few
months worth of oil and the oil wouldn't
start flowing for many years into the
future and I don't think it's a fair
price to pay to to destroy precious
parts of America's environment we have
to bet on the future and move beyond the
current technologies to have a whole new
generation of more efficient cleaner
energy technologies
was an issue I know a lot about I was a
small oil person for a while in West
Texas this is an administration that's
had no plan and all of a sudden the
results of having no plan have caught up
with America first and foremost we got
to make sure we fully fund LIHEAP which
is a way to help low income folks
particularly here in the East pay for
their high fuel bills secondly we need
an active exploration program in America
the only way to become less dependent on
foreign sources of crude oil is to
explore at home and you bet I want to
open up a small part of a part of Alaska
because when that field is online it
will produce a million barrels a day
today we import a million barrels from
Saddam Hussein I would rather that a
million come from our own hemisphere our
own country as opposed from Saddam
Hussein I want to build more pipelines
to move natural gas throughout this
Hemisphere I want to develop the coal
resources in America and have coal clean
coal technologies we've got abundant
supplies of energy here in America and
we better get after it and better start
exploring it otherwise we're gonna be in
deep trouble in the future because of
our dependency on foreign sources of
crude so if somebody is watching tonight
listening to it the two of you just said
is it fair to say okay the differences
between Vice President Gore and George W
Bush governor Bush of the Father you are
for doing something on the consumption
in Europe for doing something on a
production let me clarify I'm for doing
something both on the supply side and
production side and on the consumption
side and let me say that I found one
thing in Governor Bush's answer that we
certainly agree on and that's the
low-income heating assistance program
and I commend you for supporting that I
worked to get four hundred million
dollars just a couple of weeks ago and
to establish a permanent home heating
oil reserve here in the Northeast now as
for the proposals that I've worked for
for renewables and conservation and
efficiency and the new technologies the
fact is for the last few years in the
Congress we faced a lot of opposition to
them they've only they've only approved
about 10 percent of the agenda that I've
helped to send up there and I think
we need to get serious about this energy
crisis both in the Congress and in in
the White House and if you entrust me
with the presidency I will tackle this
problem and focus on new technologies
that will make us less dependent on big
oil or foreign oil how would you draw
the difference well I would first say
that you should have been tackling it
for the last seven years and secondly
the difference is is that we need to
explore at home and the vice president
doesn't believe in exploration for
example in Alaska there's a lot of
shut-in gas that we need to be moving
out of Alaska by pipeline there's an
interesting issue up in the northwest as
well and that is whether or not we
remove dams that produce hydroelectric
energy I'm against removing dams in the
northwest I don't know where the
vice-president stands but that's a
renewable source of energy we need to
keep in line I was in coal country
yesterday in West Virginia there's an
abundant supply of coal in America I
know we can do a better job of clean
coal technologies I'm going to ask the
Congress for two billion dollars to make
sure that we have the cleanest coal
technologies in the world my answer to
you is is that in the short term we need
to get after it here in America we need
to explore our resources and and we need
to develop our reservoirs of domestic
production we also need to have a
hemispheric energy policy where Canada
and Mexico and the United States come
together I brought this up recently with
Vicente Fox through the newly elected
president he's a man I know from Mexico
and I talked about how best to be able
to expedite the the exploration of
natural gas in Mexico and transported up
to the United States so we become less
dependent on foreign sources of crude
oil this is a major problem facing
America the administration did not deal
with it it's time for a new
administration to deal with the energy
problem if I just just briefly Jim I
know I found a couple of other things
that we agree on and we may not find
that many the season so I wanted to
emphasize them I strongly support new
investments in clean coal technology I
made a proposal three months ago on this
and also domestic exploration yes but
not in the environmental treasures of
our country we don't have to do that
that's the wrong choice I know the oil
company's been itching to do that but it
is not the right thing for the
it's the right thing for the consumers
less dependency upon foreign sources
accrued is good for consumers and we can
do so in an environmentally friendly way
well can I have the last word on this
new question of course all right
governor Bush if elected president would
you try to overturn the FDA's approval
last week of the abortion pill
ru-486 I don't think a president can do
that I was disappointed in the ruling
because I think abortions ought to be
more rare in America and I'm worried
that that pill will create more abortion
will cause more people to have abortions
this is a very important topic and it's
a very sensitive topic because a lot of
good people disagree on the issue I
think what the next president ought to
do is to is to promote a cultural life
in America is a life of the life of the
elderly and life of those living all
across the country life of the unborn as
a matter of fact I think a noble goal
for this country is that every child
born and unborn ought to be protected in
law and welcomed life but I know we got
to change a lot of minds before we
before we get there in America what I do
believe is we can find good common
ground on issues like parental
notification or parental consent and I
know we need to ban partial birth
abortions this is a place where my
opponent and I have strong disagreements
that I believe banning partial birth
abortion would be a positive step toward
reducing the number of abortions in
America this is an issue that that's
going to require a new attitude we've
been battling over abortion for a long
period of time
surely this nation can come together to
to promote the value of life surely we
can fight off these laws that will
encourage doctors that allow doctors to
take the lives of our seniors surely we
can have work together to create a
culture of life so some of these
youngsters who feel like they can take a
neighbor's life with a gun will
understand that that's that that's not
the way America is meant to be and
surely we can find common ground to
reduce the number of abortions in
America as to the drug itself I
mentioned I was disappointed I hope and
I hope the FDA took its time to make
sure that American women
be safe who used us who use this drug
Vice President Gore well Jim the FDA
took 12 years and I do support that
decision
they determined it was medically safe
for the women who used that drug now
this is indeed a very important issue
first of all on the issue of partial
birth or so-called late term abortion I
would sign a law banning banning that
procedure provided that doctors have the
ability to save a woman's life or to act
if her health is severely at risk and
that's not the main issue the main issue
is whether or not the roe v wade
decision is gonna be overturned I
support a woman's right to choose my
opponent does not it is important
because the next president is going to
appoint three maybe even four justices
of the Supreme Court and governor Bush
has declared to the anti-choice groups
that he will appoint justices in the
mold of Scalia and Clarence Thomas who
are known for being the most vigorous
opponents of a woman's right to choose
here's the difference he trusts the
government to order a woman to do what
it thinks she ought to do I trust women
to make the decisions that affect their
lives their destinies and and their
bodies and I think a woman's right to
choose ought to be protected and
defended governor will I will go to the
Supreme Court question in a moment but
make sure I understand your position on
ru-486 if you're elected president will
you not through appointments to the FDA
you want support legislation to overturn
this I don't I don't think a president
can unilaterally overturn it
I think the Deaf DA's made its decision
I mean you wouldn't throw appointments
to the FDA and ask them to I think once
the decisions made has been made now
unless it's proven to be unsafe to women
well Jim you know the question you asked
if I heard you correctly was would he
support legislation to overturn it and
if I heard the statement day before
yesterday you said you would order he
said he would order his FDA appointee to
review the decision and now that sounds
to me a little bit different and I just
think that we ought to support the
decision guy I said I would make sure
that
that women to be safe we used to use the
drunk fight on the on the Supreme Court
question should a voter assume you're
pro-life you just stay in your position
should a voter assume that all judicial
appointments you make to the Supreme
Court or any other court federal court
will and also be pro-life voters should
assume that I have no litmus test on
that issue or any other issue but the
voters will know I'll put competent
judges on the bench people who will
strictly interpret the Constitution and
will not use the bench to write Social
Policy and that's going to be a big
difference between my opponent in me I
believe that I believe that the judges
ought not to take the place of the
legislative branch of government that
they're appointed for life and that they
ought to look at the Constitution is
sacred they they shouldn't misuse their
bench I don't believe in liberal
activist judges I believe in I believe
in strict constructionists and those are
the kind of judges I will appoint I've
named four Supreme Court judges in the
state of Texas and I would ask the
people to check out their qualifications
their their deliberations they're good
solid men and women who have made good
sound judgments on behalf of the people
of Texas what kind of appointment should
they expect from you thought was used
similar language to reach an exactly
opposite outcome
I don't favor litmus test but I know
that there are ways to assess how a
potential justice interprets the
Constitution and in my view the
Constitution ought to be interpreted as
a document that grows with the with with
our country in our history and I believe
for example that there is a right of
privacy in the Fourth Amendment and when
the phrase the strict constructionist is
used and when the names of Scalia and
Thomas are used as benchmarks for who
would be appointed those are those are
code words and nobody should mistake
this for saying that the governor would
appoint people who would overturn roe v
wade I mean just it's very clear to me
and I would appoint people who have a
philosophy that I think would make it
quite likely that they would uphold a
row v Wade is is the vice-president
right is that a code word for
overturning roe v wade
sounds like the vice-president not very
right many times tonight III just told
you the criterion of which I'll appoint
judges I've had a record of appointing
judges in the state of Texas that's
where the governor gets to do a governor
gets to name Supreme Court judges and
I've got he also reads all kinds of
things into my tax plan in about
Medicare plan and I just want the
viewers out there to listen to what I
have to say about that's a year reverse
the question what what what code phrases
should we'd read by what you said about
what kind of people you will appoint to
the u.s. it would be very likely that
they'd uphold roe v wade but I do
believe it's wrong to use a litmus test
but if you if you look at the the
history of a of a lower court judges
rulings you can get a pretty good idea
of how they're going to interpret
questions now a lot of questions are
first impression and and these questions
that have been seen many times come up
in a new context and so but you know
that this is a very important issue
because a lot of young women in this
country we write for granted and it
could be lost it is on the ballot in
this election make no mistake about I'll
tell you what kind of judges he'll put
on there he'll put liberal activist
judges who will use their bench to
subvert the legislature that's what
he'll do that's not right
new subject new question Vice President
Gore a president Milosevic of Yugoslavia
refuses to accept the election results
and leave office what action if any
should the United States take to get him
out of there well Milosevic has lost the
election his opponent cos2 Nietzsche has
won the election it's overwhelming
Milosevic says government refuses to
release the vote count there's now a
general strike going on there
demonstrating I think we should support
the people of Serbia and the the
Yugoslavia as they call the Serbia plus
Montenegro and put pressure in every way
possible to recognize the lawful outcome
of the election the people of Serbia
have acted very brave
in in kicking this guy out of office now
he is trying to not release the votes
and then go straight to a so-called
runoff election without even announcing
the results of the first vote now we've
made it clear along with our allies that
when Milosevic leaves then Serbia will
be able to have a more normal
relationship with the rest of the world
that is a very strong incentive that we
have given them to do the right thing
bear in mind also Milosevic has been
indicted as a war criminal and he should
be held accountable for his actions now
we have to take measured steps because
the sentiment within Serbia is for
understandable reasons still against the
United States because their nationalism
has led even if they don't like
Milosevic they still have some feelings
lingering from the NATO action there so
we have to be intelligent in the way we
go about it but make no mistake about it
we should do everything we can to see
that the will of the Serbian people
expressed in this extraordinary election
is done and I hope that you'll be out of
office very shortly governor Bush one
minute well I'm pleased with the results
of the election as the vice president is
it's time for the man to go and it means
that the United States must have a
strong diplomatic hand with our friends
and NATO that's why it's important to
make sure our alliances are as strong as
they possibly can be to keep the
pressure on
mr. Milosevic but it would be an
interesting moment for the Russians to
step up and lead as well be wonderful my
time for the president Russia to step
into the Balkans and convince mr.
Milosevic it's in his best interest in
his country's best interest to leave
office the Russians have got a lot of
sway in that part of the world and we'd
like to see them use that sway to to to
encourage democracy to take hold and so
it's an encouraging election it's time
for the man to leave but what if he
doesn't leave mr. Vaz what if all the
things all the diplomatic efforts all
the pressure from all over the world and
he still doesn't go is
the kind of thing to be specific that
you as president would consider the use
of US military force to get him gone in
this particular situation no bear in
mind that we have a lot of sanctions in
force against Serbia right now and the
people of Serbia know that they can
escape all those sanctions if this guy
is turned out of power now I understand
what the governor has said about asking
the Russians to be involved and under
some circumstances that might be a good
idea but being as they have not yet been
willing to recognize cos to Nita as the
the lawful winner of the election I'm
not sure that it's right for us to
invite the the President of Russia to to
mediate this this dispute there because
we might not like the result that comes
out of that they currently favor going
forward with a runoff election I think
that's the wrong thing I think the
governor's instinct is not necessarily
bad because we have worked with the
Russians in a constructive way in Kosovo
for example to end the conflict there
but but I think we need to be very
careful in the present situation before
we invite the Russians to play the lead
role in mediating well obviously we
wouldn't use the Russians if they didn't
agree with our answer mr. vice president
well they don't but let me say this to
you I wouldn't use force I wouldn't use
for he wouldn't use force no why not
because it's not in our national
interest to use force in this case I
would keep pressure I would use
diplomacy there's a difference between
what the president did who I supported
and in Kosovo and this and this up for
the people in this region to figure out
how to take control of their country new
question how would you go about as
president deciding when it was in the
national interest to use US force
generally well if it's in our vital
national interests and that means
whether or not our territory our
territory is threatened or people could
be harmed whether or not our alliances
or defense alliances are threatened
whether or not our friends in the Middle
East or threatened that would be a time
because can
seriously considering the use of force
secondly whether or not the mission was
clear whether or not it was a clear
understanding as to what the what the
mission would be thirdly whether or not
we were prepared and trained to win
whether or not our our forces were of
high morale and high standing and well
equipped and finally whether or not
there was an exit strategy I would take
the use of force very seriously I would
be guarded in my approach I don't think
we can be all things to all people in
the world I think we got to be very
careful when we commit our troops the
vice president and I have a disagreement
about the use of troops he believes in
nation-building I would be very careful
about using our troops as nation
builders I believe the role of the
military is to fight and win war and
therefore prevent war from happening in
the first place and so I take my I take
my responsibility seriously and it
starts with making sure we rebuild our
military power morale in today's
military is too low we're having trouble
meeting recruiting goals we met the
goals this year but in the previous
years we have not met recruiting goals
where some of our troops are not well
well equipped
I believe we're overextended in too many
places and and therefore I want to
rebuild the military power it starts
with a billion dollar pay raise for the
men and women who wear the uniform of
billion dollars more than the president
recently signed into law is to make sure
our troops are well housed and well
equipped bonus plans to keep some of our
high skilled folks in the services and a
commander-in-chief who clearly sets the
mission and the mission is to fight and
win war and therefore prevent war from
happening in the first place
vice president gore one minute let me
tell you what I'll do first of all I
want to make it clear our military is
the strongest best-trained best-equipped
best-led fighting force in the world and
in the history of the world nobody
should have any doubt about that
least of all our adversaries or
potential adversaries I entrust me with
the presidency I will do whatever is
necessary
in order to make sure our forces stay
the strongest in the world
in fact in my ten-year budget proposal I
have set aside more than twice as much
for this purpose as governor Bush has in
his proposal now I think we should be
reluctant to get involved in someplace
in a foreign country but if our national
security is at stake if we have allies
if we've tried every other course if
we're sure military action will succeed
and if the costs are proportionate to
the benefits we should get involved now
just because we can't don't want to get
involved everywhere it doesn't mean we
should back off
anywhere it comes up and I disagree with
the fact with the proposal that maybe
only when oil supplies are at stake than
our national security is at risk I think
that that there are situations like in
Bosnia or Kosovo where there's a
genocide where where our national
security is at stake there I agree that
our militaries are strongest in the
world today that's not the question the
question is it will be the strongest in
years to come and the warning signs are
real everywhere I go around the campaign
trail I see people who are moms and dads
whose son or daughter may wear the
uniform and they tell me about how
discouraged their son or daughter may be
if recent poll was taken amongst a
thousand enlisted personnel as well as
officers over half of whom are going to
lead the service when their time of
enlistment is up there the captain's are
leaving the service there is a problem
and it's to require a new
commander-in-chief to rebuild a military
power the other day I was honored to be
flanked by Colin Powell and general
Norman Schwarzkopf who stood by my side
and agreed with me they said we can even
though there were the strongest military
that if we don't do something quickly we
don't have a clear vision of the
military we if you don't stop extending
our troops all around the world and
nation-building missions then we're
gonna have a serious problem coming down
the road and I'm going to prevent that
I'm going to rebuild our military power
and it's one of the major priorities of
my administration
Vice President Gore how should the
voters go about deciding which one of
you is better suited to make the kinds
of decisions we've enjoyed it's whether
it's milazzo bitch or whether it's
whatever in the military and foreign
policy area well they should look at our
proposals and and look at us as as
people and make up their own minds when
I was a young man I volunteered for the
army I served my country in Vietnam
my father was a senator who strongly
opposed the Vietnam War I went to
college in this great city and most of
my peers felt against the war as I did
but I went anyway because I knew if I
didn't somebody else in the small town
of Carthage Tennessee would have to go
in my place I served for eight years in
the House of Representatives and I
served on the Intelligence Committee
specialized in looking at arms control I
served for eight years in the United
States Senate and served on the Armed
Services Committee for the last eight
years I've served on the National
Security Council and when the conflict
came up in Bosnia
I saw a genocide in the heart of Europe
with the most violent war on the
continent of Europe since World War two
look that's where World War one started
in the Balkans my uncle was a victim of
poison gas there millions of Americans
saw the results of that conflict we have
to be willing to make good sound
judgments and incidentally I know the
value of making sure our troops have the
latest technology the governor's
proposed skipping the next generation of
weapons I think that's a big mistake
because I think we have to stay at the
cutting edge
governor how would you advise the voters
to make the decision on this issue I
think you got to look at how one is
handled responsibilities in office
whether or not it's the same in domestic
policy as well Jim whether or not you've
got the capacity to convince people to
follow whether or not one makes
decisions based upon sound principles or
whether or not you rely upon polls and
focus groups on how to decide what the
course of action is we've got too much
polling and focus groups going on in
Washington today we need
decisions made on sound principles I've
been the governor of a big state I think
one of the hallmarks of my my my
relationship in Austin Texas is is that
I've had the capacity to work with both
Republicans and Democrats I think that's
an important part of leadership I think
it what it means to build consensus I've
shown I know how to do so as a matter of
fact tonight in the audience there's one
elected state senator is a Democrat a
former state Rep who's a Democrat a
couple in one state water officers a
Democrat me there's a lot of Democrats
who are in the debate go ahead because
they want to show their support that
shows I know how to lead and that so the
fundamental answer your question who can
lead and who has shown the ability to
get things done if I could say way over
the three and a half minutes go ahead I
think one of the key points in foreign
policy and national security policy is
the need to reestablish the old
fashioned principle that politics ought
to stop at the water's edge when I was
in the United States Congress I worked
with former President Reagan to
modernize our strategic weaponry and to
pursue arms control in a responsible way
when I was in the United States Senate I
worked with former President Bush your
father and was one of only a few
Democrats in the Senate to support the
Persian Gulf War
I think bipartisanship is a national
asset and we have to find ways to
reestablish it in foreign policy and
national security in halls in a word you
have a problem with that yeah why
haven't they done it in seven years
new subject new question should the
voters of this election Vice President
Gore see this on domestic area in the
domestic area as a major choice between
competing political philosophies oh
absolutely this is a very important
moment in the history of our country
look we've got the biggest surpluses in
all of American history well the the key
question that has to be answered in this
election is will we use that prosperity
wisely in a way that benefits all of our
people and doesn't go just to the few
almost half of all the tax cut benefits
as I said under Governor Bush's plan go
to the wealthiest 1% I think
we have to make the right and
responsible choices I think we have to
invest in education protecting the
environment health care a prescription
drug benefit that goes to all seniors
not just to the poor under Medicare not
relying on HMOs and insurance companies
I think that we have to help parents and
strengthen families by dealing with the
kind of inappropriate entertainment
material that families are just
heartsick that their children are
exposed to I think we have got to have
welfare reform taken to the next stage I
think that we have got to balance the
budget every single year pay down the
national debt and in fact under my
proposal the the national debt will be
completely eliminated by the year 2012 I
think we need to put Medicare and Social
Security in a lockbox
the governor will not put Medicare in a
lockbox I don't think it should be used
as a piggy bank for other programs I
think it needs to be moved out of the
budget and protected I'll veto anything
that takes money out of Social Security
or Medicare for anything other than
Social Security or Medicare now the
priorities are just very different I'll
give you a couple of examples for every
new dollar that I proposed for spending
on health care governor Bush spends $3
for a tax cut for the wealthiest 1% now
for every dollar that I proposed has
been on education he spends $5 on a tax
cut for the wealthiest 1% those are very
clear differences governor one man is
practicing fuzzy math again there's
differences under vice president Gore's
plan he's going to grow the federal
government in the largest increase since
Lyndon Baines Johnson in 1965 and we're
talking about a massive government folks
we're talking about adding to or are
increasing two hundred new programs two
hundred programs 20,000 new bureaucrats
imagine how many IRS agents is going to
take to be able to figure out his
targeted tax cut for the middle class
that excludes a 50 million Americans
there is a huge difference in this
campaign he says he's going to give you
tax cuts 50 million of you won't receive
it he said in his
Beach he wants to make sure the right
people get tax relief that's not the
role of a president to decide right and
wrong everybody who pays taxes ought to
get tax relief after my plan is in place
the wealthy of wealthiest Americans will
pay a higher percentage of taxes than
they do today and the poorest of
Americans six million families seven
million people won't pay any tax at all
it is a huge difference it's the
difference between big exploding federal
government that wants to think on your
behalf and a plan that meets priorities
and liberate working people to be able
to make decisions on your own let me
just say Jim you haven't heard the
governor denied these numbers he's
called him phony he's called him fuzzy
but the fact remains almost 30% of his
proposed tax cut goes to only two
Americans that make more than 1 million
dollars per year but more money goes to
the can I have a rebuttal here sure
about what to say if he if he buys that
let me just tell you what the facts are
the facts are after my plan the
wealthiest of Americans pay more taxes
than of the percentage of the whole than
they do today secondly if your family of
four making $50,000 in Massachusetts you
get a 50% tax cut let me give you one
example the Strunk family in Allentown
Pennsylvania I campaign with them the
other day
they make 51 thousand dollars combined
income they pay about $3,800 in taxes
and are $3,500 in taxes under my plan
they get eighteen hundred dollars of tax
relief under vice president Gore's plan
they give one hundred and forty five
dollars of tax relief now you tell me
who stands on the side of the rocks you
ask the strong if I could get my plan it
makes more sense and there's a
difference of opinion he would rather
spend the strokes eighteen hundred
dollars and I would rather the structure
own money you see it that way but no I
don't and I'm not gonna go to calling
names on his facts I'm just gonna tell
you what the real facts are the analysis
that he's talking about leaves out more
than half of the tax cuts that I have
proposed and if you just add the numbers
up he still hasn't denied it he spends
more money on a tax cut for the
wealthiest 1%
all of his new proposals for
prescription drugs healthcare education
and national defense combined now those
are the wrong priorities six hundred and
sixty five billion dollars over ten
years for the wealthiest 1% now and as I
said almost 30 percent of it goes to
Americans that make more than 1 million
dollars per year every middle-class
family is eligible for a tax cut under
my proposal let me give you some
specific examples
I believe that college tuition up to
$10,000 a year ought to be tax
deductible so middle-class families can
choose to send their children to college
I believe that all seniors should be
able to choose their own doctors and get
prescription drugs from their own
pharmacist with the with Medicare paying
half the bill I believe that parents
ought to have more choices with charter
schools and public school choice to send
their kids always to a safe school I
think we need to make education the
number one priority in our country and
treat teachers like the professionals
that they are and that's why I have made
it the number one priority in my budget
not a tax cut for the wealthy yet let me
talk about tax cuts one more time this
is a man whose plan excludes 50 million
American us so he doesn't believe that
well take for example the mayor's
penalty if you if you itemize your tax
return you get no marriage penalty
relief he picks and chooses he decides
whether who the right people are it's a
fundamental difference of opinion I want
my fellow Americans to hear one more
time we're going to spend 25 trillion
dollars we could collect 25 trillion
dollars of revenue over the next 10
years and we're gonna project it to
spend 21 trillion now surely we can send
5% of that back to you all who pay the
bills there is a problem I want to say
something Jim wait a minute man's been
disparaging my plan with all this
Washington fuzzy math I want you to hear
a problem we've done in America if
you're a single mother making $22,000 a
year and you've got two children under
this tax code for every additional
dollar you make you pay a higher
marginal rate on that dollar than
someone making $200,000 a year and that
is not right
and so my plan drops the rate from 15%
to 10% and increases the child credit
from $500 to $1,000 to make the code
more fair for everybody not just a few
not just you know a handful everybody
who pays taxes ought to get some relief
all right having cleared that up we're
going to a new question education
Governor Bush both of you promised
dramatically to change dramatically
public education in this country but are
the public money spent on education only
6% of it is federal money right you want
to change 100% of public education with
6% of the money is that possible well I
tell you we can make a huge difference
by saying if you receive federal money
we expect you to show results let me
give you a story about public ed if I my
gym
it's about Kipp Academy in Houston Texas
it's a it's a charter school run by some
people from Teach for America young
folks that say well I'm gonna do
something good for my country I want to
teach a guy named Michael runs the
school it's a school full of so-called
at-risk children so it's how we
unfortunately label certain children it
means basically they can't learn it's a
school of strong discipline and high
standards it's one of the best schools
in Houston and here are the key
ingredients high expectations strong
accountability what Michael says is
don't put all these rules on us just let
us teach and hold us accountable for
every grade and that's what we do
and as a result these young mainly
Hispanic youngsters are some of the best
learners in in Houston Texas that's my
vision for public education all around
America many of you viewers don't know
but Laura and I sent our girls to public
school you went to Austin High School
and many of the public schools are
meeting the call but unfortunately a lot
of schools are trapping children and
schools that just won't teach and will
change so here's the role of the federal
government one is to change head start
into a rainy program two is to say that
if you want to access reading money you
can do so because the goal is for every
single child to learn to read there must
be K through 2 diagnostic tools there's
teacher training money of a
three we've got to consolidate federal
programs to free districts to free the
schools to encourage innovators like
Michael to let schools reach out beyond
the confines of the current structure to
recruit Teach for teach for the children
type teachers for we're gonna say if you
receive federal money measure third
grade fourth grade fifth grade sixth
grade seventh grade eighth grade and
show us whether or not children are
learning to read and write and add and
subtract and if so there'll be a bonus
plan and and and and but if not instead
of continuing to subsidize failure we
the money will go to the parents of the
parent can choose a different public
school the federal money attributed to
the child will go to the parent for the
public school or a charter school or
tutorial or Catholic school what I care
about is children and so does Michael
Feinberg and you know what it can happen
in America with the right kind of
leadership Vice President Gore look we
agree on a couple of things on education
I strongly support new accountability so
does governor Bush I strongly support
local control so does governor Bush I'm
in favor of testing as a way of
measuring performance every school every
school district have every state test
the children I've also proposed a
voluntary national test in the fourth
grade and eighth grade and a form of
testing that the governor has not
endorsed I think that all new teachers
ought to be tested including in the
subjects that they teach we've got to
recruit a hundred thousand new teachers
and I have budgeted for that we've got
to reduce the class size so that the
student who walks in has more one-on-one
time with the teacher we ought to have
universal preschool and we ought to make
college tuition tax deductible up to ten
thousand dollars a year yeah I'd like to
tell you a quick story I got a letter
today as I left Sarasota Florida I'm
here with a group of 13 people from
around the country who helped me prepare
and we had a great time but two days ago
we ate lunch at a restaurant and the guy
who served us lunch got me a letter
today he had his name is Randy Ellis he
has a 15 year old daughter named Kaylie
who's in Sarasota high school her
science class was supposed to be for 24
students she is the 36
student in that classroom sent me a
picture of her in the classroom they
can't squeeze another desk in for her so
she has to stand during class I want the
federal government consistent with local
control and new accountability to make
the improvement of our schools the
number one priority so Kaylee will have
a desk and can sit out in a classroom
where she can learn all right so having
heard the two of you
voters have just heard the two of you
what's the difference what's the choice
between the two of you on education the
first is the difference is there is no
new accountability measures in vice
president Gore's plan
he says he's for voluntary testing you
can't have voluntary testing you must
have mandatory testing you must say that
if you receive money
you must show us whether or not children
are learning to read and write and add
and subtract that's the difference you
may claim you've got mandatory testing
but you don't mr. vice president and
that is a huge difference testing is the
cornerstone reform you know how I know
because it's the cornerstone of reform
in the state of Texas Republicans and
Democrats came together and asked the
question what can we do to make our
public education the best in the country
and we've done a long way working
together to do so in the cornerstone is
to have strong accountability in return
for money and in return for flexibility
we're going to ask you to show us
whether or not and we ask them post the
results on the Internet we encourage
parents to take a look at the the
comparative results of schools we've got
a strong charter school movement that I
signed the legislation to get started in
the state of Texas I believe if we find
poor children trapped in schools that
won't teach we need to free the parents
I think we need to expand education
savings accounts it's something of the
vice president's vice presidential
running mate support so there's big
differences of opinion he was a poor he
won't support freeing local districts
from the strings of federal money all
right how do you see the difference well
first of all I do have mandatory testing
I think the governor may not have have
heard what I said clearly the the
voluntary national test is in addition
to the mandatory testing that we require
of states all schools all school
districts students themselves and
required teacher testing which goes a
step farther
governor Bush has been willing to go
here here are a couple of differences
though a Jim Governor Bush is in favor
of vouchers which take taxpayer money
away from public schools and give them
to private schools that are not
accountable for how the money is used
and don't have to take all applicants
now private schools play a great role in
in our society all of our children have
gone to both public schools and private
schools but I don't think private
schools should have a right to take
taxpayer money away from public schools
at a time when Kaylee Ellis is standing
in that classroom let me give you
another example I went to a school in
Dade County Florida where the facilities
are so overcrowded the children have to
eat lunch in shifts with the first shift
for lunch starting at 9:30 in the
morning look this is a funding crisis
all around the country there are fewer
parents of school-aged children in the
vote as a percentage of the voting
population and there's the largest
generation of students ever we're in an
Information Age when learning is more
important than ever ninety percent of
our kids go to public schools we have to
make it the number one priority
modernize our schools reduce the class
size rid recruit new teachers give every
child a chance to learn with one-on-one
time in a quality high quality safe
school if it's a failing school shut it
down and reopen it under a new principal
with a turnaround team of specialists
the way governor Jim Hunt does in North
Carolina here's another difference the
governor if it's a failing school would
leave the children in that failing
school for three years and then give a
little bit of money to the parents a
down payment on a down payment for
private school tuition and pretend that
that would be enough for them to go out
and go to a private okay first of all
most good governance is at the state
level see here's the mentality I'm gonna
make the state do this I'm gonna make
the state do that all I'm saying is if
you spend money show us results and
tests every year which you do not do mr.
vice president you do not test every
year you can say you do in two cameras
but you don't unless you've changed your
plan here on the stage
secondly and you need to test every year
because that's what you determine
whether or not children are progressing
to excellence secondly one of the things
that we've got to be careful about in
politics is throwing money at a system
that has not yet been reformed more
money as needed and I spend more money
but step one is to make sure we reform
the system to have the system in place
that leads no child behind to stop this
business about asking gosh how old are
you if you're ten we're gonna put you
here if we're 12 we'll put you here and
start asking the question what do you
know and if you don't know what you're
supposed to know we'll make sure you do
early before it is too late
new question we've been talking about a
lot of specific issues it's often said
that in the final analysis about 90% of
being the president of the United States
is dealing with the unexpected not with
issues that came up in the campaign Vice
President Gore can you point to a
decision an action you have taken that
illustrates your ability to handle the
unexpected the crisis under fire etc
when the action in Kosovo was dragging
on and we were searching for a solution
to the problem our country had defeated
the adversary on the battlefield without
a single American life being lost in
combat but the the dictator Milosevic
was hanging on I invited the former
Prime Minister of Russia to my house and
took a risk in asking him to get
personally involved along with the the
head of Finland to go to Belgrade and to
take a set of proposals from the United
States that would constitute basically a
surrender by Serbia but it was a
calculated risk that that paid off now I
could probably give you some other
examples of decisions over the last 24
years I have been in in public service
for 24 years Jim and throughout all that
time the people I have fought for
have been the middle-class families and
I have been willing to stand up to
powerful interests like the the big
insurance companies the drug companies
the HMOs the oil companies they they
have good people and they play a
constructive role sometimes but
sometimes they get too much power I cast
my lot with the people even when it
means that you have to stand up to some
powerful interests who are trying to
turn the the the policies and the laws
to their advantage
that's you can see it in in this
campaign the big drug companies support
Governor Bush's prescription drug
proposal they oppose mine because they
don't want to get Medicare involved
because they're afraid that Medicare
will negotiate lower prices for seniors
who currently pay the highest prices of
all governor Bush well I've been
standing up to big Hollywood big trial
lawyers what was the question it was
about emergencies what well it was about
well okay you know as governor when I
think you have to deal with is
catastrophe I can remember the fires
that swept Parker County Texas I
remember the floods that swept our state
I remember going down to Del Rio Texas
I've got a I've got to pay the
administration a compliment James Lee
Witt a FEMA stand a really good job of
working with governors during times of
crisis but that's the time when you're
tested not only it's time to test your
mettle it's the time to test your heart
when you see people whose lives have
been turned upside down it broke my
heart to go to the flood scene in Del
Rio were fell and his family just got
completely uprooted the only thing I
knew to do was to get aid as quickly as
possible which we did with state and
federal help and to put my arms around a
man and his family and cry with them but
that's what governors do governors are
oftentimes found the frontline of
catastrophic situations
new question there can be all kinds of
crises governor question for you there
could be a crisis for instance in the
financial area yeah
the stock market could take a tumble
there could be a failure of a major
financial institution what is your
general attitude toward government
intervention in such events well it
depends obviously but what I would do
first and foremost is I would get in
touch with the Federal Reserve Chairman
Alan Greenspan to to find out all the
facts and all the circumstances I would
have my Secretary of Treasury be in
touch with the financial centers not
only here but at home I would make sure
that key members of Congress were called
in to discuss the gravity of the
situation and I would come up with a
game plan to deal with it that's what
governors end up doing we end up being
problem solvers we come up with
practical common-sense solutions for for
problems that were confronted with and
in this case in case of a financial
crisis I would gather all the facts
before I made the decision as to what
the government ought or ought not to do
first I want to compliment the governor
on his response to those fires and
floods in Texas I accompanied James Lee
Witt down to Texas when those fires
broke out and FEMA has been a major
flagship project of our reinventing
government efforts and I agree it works
extremely well now on the international
financial crises that come up my friend
Bob Rubin former Secretary of Treasury
is here he's a very close adviser to me
and a great friend in all respects I
have had a chance to work with him and
Alan Greenspan and others on the crisis
following the collapse of the Mexican
peso
when the Asian financial crisis raised
the risk of worldwide recession that
could affect our economy and starting
and now of course the euros value has
been dropping but seems to be under
control
but it started for me in the last eight
years when I had the honor of casting
the tie-breaking vote to end the old
economic plan here at home and put into
place a new economic plan that has
helped us to make some progress 22
million new jobs and the greatest
prosperity ever but it's not good enough
and my attitude is you ain't seen
nothing yet we need to do more and
better so governor would you agree there
is no basic difference here on interval
interval the federal government
intervening and what might be seen by
others to be a private financial crisis
if it's that soon no there's no
difference on that there is a difference
though as to what the economy is met I
think the economy has meant more for the
gore and Clinton folks then the gore and
Clinton folks have meant for the economy
I think most the economic growth that
has taken place is result of ingenuity
and hard work and entrepreneurship and
that's the role of governments to
encourage that but in terms of the
response to the question No okay can I
comment on that you may see you know I
think that the American people deserve
credit for the great economy that we
have and it's their ingenuity I agree
with that but you know they were they
were working pretty hard at u-verse ago
and they had ingenuity eight years ago
the difference is we've got a new policy
and instead of concentrating on tax cuts
mostly for the wealthy we want I want
tax cuts for the middle class families
and I want to continue the prosperity
and make sure that it enriches not just
the few but all of our families look we
have gone from the biggest deficits to
the biggest surpluses
we've gone from a triple dip recession
during the previous 12 years to a
tripling of the stock market instead of
high unemployment we've got the lowest
african-american and lowest Latino
unemployment rates ever in history and
22 million new jobs but it's not good
enough too many people have been left
behind we have got to do much more and
the key is job training education
investments in health care and education
the environment retirement security and
incidentally we have got to preserve
Social Security and I am totally opposed
to divert
one out of every six dollars away from
the Social Security trust fund as the
governor has proposed into the stock
market I want new incentives for savings
and investment for the young couples who
are working hard so they can save and
invest on their own on top of Social
Security not at the expense of Social
Security as the governor proposes two
points one a lot of folks are still
waiting for that 1992 middle-class tax
cut I remember vice presidents saying
just give us a chance to get up there
we're gonna make sure you get tax cuts
it didn't happen and now he's having to
say it again it says they've had their
chance to to deliver a tax cut to you
secondly the surest way to bust this
economy is to increase the role in the
size of the federal government the
Senate Budget Committee did a study of
the vice president's expenditures
they've been projected that it could
conceivably bust the budget by 900
billion dollars that means he's either
going to have to raise her taxes by 900
billion or going to the Social Security
surplus for nine hundred billion this is
a plan that is going to increase the
bureaucracy by 20,000 people
his targeted tax cut is so detailed so
much fine print that it's gonna require
numerous IRS agents now we need somebody
to simplify the code to be fair to
continued prosperity by sharing some of
the surplus with the people who pay the
bills particularly those at the bottom
end of the economic ladder but if I
could respond Jim what he's quoting is
not the Senate Budget Committee it is a
partisan press release by the
Republicans on the Senate Budget
Committee that's not worth the
government the taxpayer paid paper that
it's printed on now as for 20,000 new
bureaucrats as you call them you know
the size of the federal government will
go down in a Gore administration in the
reinventing government program you just
look at the numbers it is 300,000 people
smaller today than it was eight years
ago now the fact is you're going to have
a hard time convincing
folks that we were a whole lot better
off eight years ago than we are today
but that's not the question the question
is will we be better off four years from
now than we are today and as for the
surest way to threaten our prosperity
having a one point nine trillion dollar
tax cut almost half of which goes to the
wealthy and a one trillion dollar Social
Security privatization proposal is the
surest way to put our budget into
deficit raise interest rates I can't let
the man continue with fuzzy math it's
1.3 trillion mr. vice president it's
gonna go to everybody who pays taxes I'm
not gonna be one of these kinds of
presidents that said you get tax relief
and you don't I'm not gonna be a picnic
user what is fair is everybody who pays
taxes ought to get relief I thought we
cleared this up a new new question on
Social Security both of you have Social
Security reform plans so we could spend
the rest of the evening and two or three
other evenings talking about them in
detail what I'm gonna may be that but
many experts including federal reserve
chairman Greenspan Vice President Gore
say that it will be impossible for
either of you
essentially to keep the system viable on
its own during the coming baby boomer
baby boomer retirement onslaught without
either reducing benefits or increasing
taxes do you disagree I do disagree
because if we can keep our prosperity
going if we can continue balancing the
budget and paying down the debt then the
strong economy keeps generating
surpluses and here's what I would do
here's my plan I will keep Social
Security in a lockbox and that pays down
the national debt and the interest
savings I would put right back into
Social Security that extends the life of
Social Security for 55 years now III
think that it's very important to
understand that cutting benefits under
Social Security means that that people
like Winifred Skinner from Des Moines
Iowa who's here would really have a much
harder time because there are millions
of seniors who are living almost
hand-to-mouth and you talk about cutting
benefits I don't go along with it I am
opposed to it I'm also opposed to a plan
that diverts 1 out of every 6 dollars
away from the Social Security trust fund
you know Social Security is a trust fund
that pays the checks this year with the
money that's paid into Social Security
this year the governor wants to divert
one out of every six dollars off into
the stock market which means that he
would drain a trillion dollars out of
the Social Security trust fund over the
in this generation over the next ten
years and Social Security under that
approach would go bankrupt within this
generation his leading advisor on this
plan actually said that would be okay
because then the Social Security trust
fund could start borrowing it would
borrow up to a three trillion dollars
now Social Security has never done that
and I don't think it should do that I
think it should stay in a lockbox and
I'll tell you this I will veto anything
that takes money out of Social Security
for privatization or anything else other
than Social Security governor well it's
interesting that on the two minutes he
spent about a million and a half on my
plan which means he doesn't want you to
know that what he's doing is loading up
IO used for future generations
he puts no real assets in the Social
Security system the revenues exceed the
expenses in Social Security to the Year
2015 which means all retirees are gonna
get the promises made so for those of
you who he wants to scare into the
voting booth to vote for him hear me
loud and clear a promise made will be a
promise kept and you bet we want to
allow younger workers to take some of
their own money see that's a difference
of opinion the vice president thinks
it's the government's money the payroll
tax is your money you ought to put it in
prudent safe investments so that one
trillion over the next ten years grows
to be three trillion the money stays
within the Social Security system it's a
part of the it's a part of the Social
Security system he keeps claiming it's
gonna be out of Social Security it's
your money it's a part of your
retirement benefits it's a fundamental
difference between what we believe I
want you to have your own asset that you
can call your own I want you to have an
asset that you can pass on from one
generation to the next I want to get a
better rate of return for your own money
than the paltry 2% that the current
Social Security trust gets today so mr.
Greenspan missed it I thought missed an
opportunity to say there's a third way
and that is to get a better rate of
return on the Social Security monies
coming into the trust
there's 2.3 trillion dollars of surplus
that we can use to make sure younger
workers have a social security plan in
the future if we're smart if we trust
workers and if we understand the power
of the compounding rate of interest
here's the difference I give a new
incentive for younger workers to save
their own money and invest their own
money but not at the expense of Social
Security on top of Social Security my
plan is Social Security plus the
governor's plan is Social Security -
your future benefits would be
by the amount that's diverted into the
stock market and if you make bad
investments that's too bad
but even before then the problem hits
because the money contributed to social
security this year is an entitlement
that's how it works and the money is
used to pay the benefits for seniors
this year if you cut the amount going in
one out of every six dollars then you
have to cut that the value of each check
by one out of every six dollars unless
you come up with the money from
somewhere else I would like to know from
the governor I know we're not supposed
to answer ask each other questions but
I'd be interested in knowing does that
trillion dollars come from the trust
fund or does it come from the rest of
the budget no there's enough money to
pay seniors today in the current affairs
of Social Security the trillion comes
from the surplus surplus is more as
money more money than needed let me tell
you what your plan is it's not Social
Security plus its Social Security plus
huge debt is what it is you leave future
generations with tremendous IOU use it's
time to have a leader that not doesn't
put off you know tomorrow what we should
do today it's time to have somebody to
step up and say look let's let younger
workers take some of their own money and
under certain guidelines invested in the
private markets the safest of federal
investments yields a four percent that's
twice the amount of rate of return than
the current Social Security trust
there's a fundamental difference of
opinion here weeks with younger worker
after younger worker here's my call that
says I trust you and you know what the
issue is changing because seniors now
understand that the promise made will be
a promise kept but younger workers now
understand we better have a government
that trusts them and that's exactly what
I'm going to do could we do another
round on it we're almost out of time
briefly when FDR established Social
Security they didn't call them high OU's
they call it the Full Faith and Credit
of the United States if you don't have
trust in that I do and if you take it
out of the surplus and the trust fund
that means the trust fund goes
corrupt in this generation within 20
years go ahead what this is a this is a
government that thinks a 2% rate of
return on your money is satisfactory
it's not this is a government that says
younger workers can't possibly have
their own asset we need to think
differently about the issue we need to
make sure our seniors get the promise
made but but I'm gonna tell you if we
don't trust younger workers to manage
some of their own money with the Social
Security surplus and to grow from 1
trillion to 3 trillion it's gonna be
impossible to bridge the gap without it
what mr. Gore's plan will do causing
huge payroll taxes or major benefit
reductions new question yes sir
governor Bush are there issues of
character that distinguish you from Vice
President Gore well man loves his wife
and I appreciate that a lot and I love
mine and the man loves his family a lot
and I appreciate that because I love my
family I think the thing that
discouraged me about the vice president
was uttering those famous words no
controlling legal authority I felt like
that there needed to be a better sense
of responsibility of what was going on
in the White House I believe that I
believe they've moved that sign the buck
stops here from the oval office desks to
the buck stops here on the Lincoln
Bedroom and that's not good for the
country it's not right we need to have a
new look about how we conduct ourselves
in office there's a huge trust I see it
all the time when people come up to me
and say I I don't want you to let me
down again and we can do better than the
past administration has done it's time
for a fresh start
it's time for a new look it's time for a
fresh start after a season of cynicism
and so I don't know the man well but
I've been disappointed about how he and
his administration has conducted the
fundraising Affairs you know going to a
Buddhist temple and then claiming it
wasn't a fundraiser is just not my view
of responsibility Vice President Gore
well I think we ought to attack our
country's problems not attack each other
I want to spend my time making this
country even better than it is not
trying to make you out to be a bad
person you may want to focus on scandals
I want to focus on results as I said a
couple of months ago I stand here as my
own man and I want you to see me for who
I really am
tipper and I've been married for 30
years we became grandparents a year and
a half ago we've got four children I
have devoted 24 years of my life to
public service and I've said this before
and I'll say it again if you entrust me
with a presidency I may not be the most
exciting politician but I will work hard
for you every day I will fight for
middle-class families and working men
and women and I will never let you down
so governor what are you saying when you
mentioned the the fundraising scandals
or this fundraising charges that
involved Vice President Gore what are
you saying that the voter should take
from that that's relevant to this
election think they ought to factor it
in when they make their decision in the
voting booth who can do a better job for
me in what way well I just you know I
think that people need to be held
responsible for the actions they take in
life no I think that go ahead well I
think I think that's part of the need
for a cultural change we need to say
that each of us need to be responsible
for we do and people in the highest
office of the land must be responsible
for decisions they make in life and and
that's the way I've conducted myself as
governor of Texas and that's the way
I'll conduct myself as president the
United States should I be fortunate
enough to earn your vote are you saying
all of this is irrelevant Vice President
Gore to though I think I think the
American people should take into account
who we are as individuals what our
experience is what our positions on the
issues are what our proposals are I am
asking you again to see me for who I
really am I'm offering you my own vision
my own experience my own proposals and
incidentally one of them is this this
current a campaign financing system has
not reflected credit on anybody in
either part
and that's one of the reasons I've said
before in our pledge here tonight if I'm
president the very first bill that Joe
Lieberman and I will send to the United
States Congress is the mccain-feingold
campaign finance reform bill and the
reason is that important is that all of
the other issues whether prescription
drugs for all seniors that are opposed
by the drug companies or the patient's
Bill of Rights to take the decisions
away from the HMOs and give them to the
doctors and nurses opposed by the HMOs
and insurance companies all of these
other proposals are going to be a lot
easier to get past for the American
people if we limit the influence of
special interest money and give
democracy back to the American people
and I wish governor Bush would join me
this evening in endorsing the
mccain-feingold campaign finance reform
bill governor Bush you know this man has
no credibility on the issue as a matter
of fact I read in The New York Times
where he said he co-sponsored the
mccain-feingold campaign fund
fundraising bill but he went in the
Senate with senator Feingold and so I
look I'm gonna what you need to know
about me is I'm gonna pull the law I'm
gonna have an attorney general that
enforces the law that it's the time for
the time for campaign funding reform is
after the election
this man has outspent me the special
interests are out spending me and and I
am not gonna lay down my arms in the
middle of a campaign
for somebody who's got no credibility on
the issue Senator McCain said it excuse
me one sec vie supposedly for Senator
McCain said in August they didn't matter
which one of you is President United
States in January there's gonna be blood
on the floor of the United States Senate
and even a tie up the United States said
it until campaign finance reform is
passed that includes a ban on soft money
first of all would you support that
effort by him or would you sign a bill
that has finally passed that included
well I would support an effort to ban
corporate soft money and labor unions
self money so long as there was dues
checkoff I've campaigned on this ever
since the primaries I believe there
needs to be instant disclosure on the
internet as to who's given to whom I
think we need to fully enforce the law I
mean I think we need to have an attorney
general this
if laws are broken we'll enforce the law
be strict about it be firm about it
look governor Bush you have attacked my
character and credibility and I am NOT
going going to respond in kind I think
we ought to focus on the problems and
not attack each other and and one of the
serious problems hear me well is that
our system of government is being
undermined by too much influence coming
from special interest money we have to
get a handle on it and like John McCain
I have learned from experience and it's
not a new position for me 24 years ago
I supported full public financing of all
federal elections and anybody who thinks
I'm just saying it'll be the first bill
I send to the Congress I want you to
know I care passionately about this and
I will fight until it becomes law I want
people to hear what he just said he is
for full public financing of
congressional elections I'm absolutely
adamantly opposed to that I don't want
the government financing congressional
elections and sorry we just say on that
wonderful note of disagreement we have
to stop here and we want to go now to
your closing statements governor Bush's
first you have two minutes
thank you Jim thank the University of
Massachusetts mr. vice president thank
you been a good lively exchange
obviously we have huge differences of
opinion mine is that I want to empower
people in their own lives I also want to
go to Washington to get some positive
things done it's gonna require a new
spirit a spirit of cooperation it's
gonna require the ability of a
Republican president to reach out across
the partisan divide and to say to
Democrats let's come together to do
what's right for America it's been in my
record as governor of Texas it'll be how
I conduct myself if forced enough to
earn your vote as president in United
States I want to finally get something
done on Medicare I want to make sure
prescription drugs are available for all
seniors and I want seniors to have
additional choices when it comes to
choosing their health care plans I want
to
finally get something done on social
security I want to make sure the seniors
who have the promise made will be a
promised cat but I want younger workers
to be able to manage some of their own
money some of their own payroll taxes in
the in the private sector under certain
guidelines to get a better rate of
return on your own money I want to
rebuild our military to keep the peace I
want to have a strong hand when it comes
to when it comes to the United States
and world affairs I don't want to try to
put our troops in all places at all
times I don't want to be the world's
policemen I want to be the world's
peacemaker by having a military of high
morale and a military that's well
equipped one I have anti-ballistic
missile systems to protect ourselves and
our allies from a rogue nation that may
try to hold us hostage or blackmail a
friend I also want to make sure
education system fulfills its hope and
promise I've had a strong record of
working with Democrats and Republicans
in Texas to make sure no child is left
behind I understand the limited role of
the federal government but it can be a
constructive role when it comes to
reform by insisting that there be strong
accountability systems though my
intentions are to earn your vote and
earn your confidence I'm asking for your
vote I want you to be on my team and for
those of you working thanks thanks from
the bottom of my heart and for those of
you making up your mind I'd be honored
to have your support Vice President Gore
two minutes I want to thank everybody
who watched and listened tonight because
this is indeed a crucial time in
American history we're at a fork in the
road we have this incredible prosperity
but a lot of people have been left
behind and we have a very important
decision to make will we use the
prosperity to enrich all of our families
and not just a few one important way of
looking at this is to ask who are you
going to fight for throughout my career
in public service I have fought for the
working men and women of this country
middle-class families why because you
are the ones who have the hardest time
paying taxes the hardest time making
ends meet you are the ones who are
making car payments and mortgage
payments and doing right by your kids
and a lot of times there are powerful
forces arrayed against you and make no
mistake about it they do have
do influence in Washington DC and it
makes a difference if you have a
president who will fight for you I know
one thing about the position of the
president it's the only position in our
Constitution that's filled by an
individual who has given the
responsibility to fight not just for one
state or one district or the
well-connected or wealthy but to fight
for all of the people including
especially those who most need somebody
who will stand up and take on whatever
powerful forces might stand in the way
there's a woman named Winifred Skinner
here tonight from Iowa I mentioned her
earlier
she's 79 years old she has social
security I'm not gonna cut her benefits
or support any proposal that would she
gets a small pension but in order to pay
for her prescription drug benefits she
has to go out seven days a week several
hours a day picking up cans she came all
the way from Iowa in a Winnebago with
her poodle in order to attend here
tonight and I want to tell her I am
going to fight for a prescription drug
benefit for all seniors and I'm gonna
fight for the people of this country for
a prosperity that benefits all and we
will continue this dialogue next week on
October the 11th at Wake Forest
University in winston-salem North
Carolina the format then will be more
informal more conversational with the
two candidates seated at a table with me
the third will be October 17th at
Washington University in st. Louis and
that will follow a town hall type format
also ahead the day after tomorrow on
October 5th
there's the 90-minute debate between the
Democratic candidate for vice president
Senator Joe Lieberman and the Republican
candidate former Secretary of Defense
Dick Cheney it will be held at Centre
College in Danville Kentucky the
moderator will be Bernard Shaw of CNN
Thank You governor Bush Vice President
Gore see you next week and for now from
Boston
good night now the two major party
candidates for president have had a
vigorous spirited exchange of views two
sharply different visions primarily on
the issues on everything from Social
Security to Medicare tax cuts the
readiness of the military of the United
States Yugoslavia the recent FDA
approval of the abortion pill
[Applause]
[Music]
by Tim Russert as we watch the two
families and the supporters there
to their friends riders
and financial support
[Applause]
clear that Vice President Gore was
determined if that's Frank hungry the
vice president
[Applause]
like Superman
the
government insisted
[Applause]
Vice President Gore obviously thinks he
has a hot button in this tax cut it's
not just the size of it but where the
benefits will go absolutely Tom and
that's why he drives rubbish debate to
keep George Bush
offensive they all do our nose that
motor
I wish to win this race he has to divide
the American people a rationale to
change the leadership during good times
explaining his tax payer and then folded
Medicare and Social Security and
prescription drugs and abortion he can
keep him in a position where it's very
difficult for George Bush to emerge and
say I can be the dominant force on this
stage two things surprise me one was
that it took the Texas governor 75
minutes to raise the cost of all the
proposals that Al Gore has been putting
before the American public and secondly
both in terms of social security and the
plan that the Vice President is
proposing and the tax cuts that the
governor is proposing
those experts across the political
spectrum are saying they're being wildly
optimistic about this this 25 trillion
dollar surplus that we kept hearing
about tonight is by no means certain at
all there's no guarantee Tom and when
governor Bush talks about his tax plan
and Al Gore talks about his spending
plans they assume all this money is
going to be there and the most
interesting thing is what happens what
happens if through is this world
economic crisis or the soil crisis and
the money disappears how do you pay for
those programs can you afford the tax
cuts seeing some familiar faces down
there the we just saw the Texas Governor
there's Vice President Al Gore with
Jesse Jackson he was there with Senator
Edward M Kennedy this is his backyard of
course we've got a late poll from John
Zogby tonight showing that Gore's at 46
Bush at 41% Ralph Nader at 5% he
couldn't get in here by the way even
though that he he did have her
credential but he was turned away by the
Presidential Commission on the base that
was taken before the debate we hasten to
point out well we want to go to Tampa
Florida now where NBC's Sarah James has
been assembling a group of undecided
voters and they are going to be the
critical vote in all of this in Florida
25 electoral votes the governor is
Jeff wore shoes the brother of course of
Texas Governor George every abortion and
Sara anyone change their mind tonight or
go one way or the other we are anxious
to know Tom because of course these are
the very voters that both bush and gore
most want to reach they are on the fence
they have been listening closely taking
notes making up their minds as they
watch and in fact this group which we've
assembled it looks very much like what
you would find of a cross-section of
undecided voters in this part of the
state so without further ado let me ask
you all show of hands if you can was
there anything that happened tonight
that helped you make up your mind raise
your hand if there was any moment
tonight no one you did I certainly like
all through the whole debate Gore's
experience because he's been on the hill
as a senator as a vice president that
means a lot to me it's one thing to run
a state I mean he all Bush did was talk
about Texas that's fine like you wanted
to hear about gore and his national
message I've got a lot of experience
he's been there seeing it done that and
how about any of the rest of you that
message from whore resonate or was there
something else that stuck out in your
minds yes Chris I don't know if that
stuck out my mind as much as their there
seemed to be some self-promotion and
some rhetoric between the two of them
where they kind of put words in each
other's mouths I didn't get from the
debate that that that Bush attacked gore
personally although he tried to make it
look that way at the end of the debate I
thought he was attacking the
administration over the last eight years
not necessarily him personally all right
well I want to really put you all on the
spot and I want to show of hands you all
came into this undecided who do you
think won how many of you show of hands
think that Bush won this debate
all right and how many of you think Gore
won this debate all right let's talk to
some of you gore voters Scott Revere
does that mean that you would be
interested in voting for Gore based on
what you heard in this debate a little
bit more leaning towards that side of
things right now I wait to see how
things play out in the next two debates
you heard that made you decide maybe
Gore is what you want to do experience
sincerity a lot of he wasn't going on
the personal attack it seemed like how
Bush was going there a little bit more
all right let's talk about some of you
who thought that Bush might be your vote
was that you Terry did you say I thought
I saw your hand go up Terry Castro you
own your own computer business what was
it that you heard that made you think
Bush the governor Bush wants to to go to
Washington to build a coalition we've
had such divisive miss we've had such
mean-spiritedness the past eight years
and destruction of people and ideals
that you're either on this side of the
fence you're on that side he wants to go
to Washington to build a coalition among
everyone all right he'll let me ask you
very quickly Carl we just have a couple
of seconds left
I saw you shaking your head over the
back-and-forth was that getting to you
it's it's basically the same political
rhetoric though that we've had pretty
much since I've been alive I mean I have
my earliest remembrances Kennedy it's
it's basically the same thing on an
ongoing basis I disagree with her to a
certain extent on Bush I don't know that
he's going to change anything I mean
it's Trish I'm seeing you shake your
head you don't believe that you don't
buy that it's not just that I go back to
the fact that Bush mentions that he's
been there for eight years we have some
various being a nurse some serious
Medicaid issues where the elderly and
the seniors are not able to pay for
their medication half is wonderful but
half of medication being $100 $50 he had
five or six medications based on what
you heard tonight Trish I believe that
the past eight years there hasn't this
issue has not been taken care of maybe
it's time to have something new and come
in and take care of the issue
tonight you might go for Bush yes ma'am
all right so this Tom then is a
cross-section just a sampling of what
we're hearing from these undecided
voters as they now give their opinions
for the first time after hearing this
debate thanks very much
Sarah James and Tim I think that that's
been really emblematic what we've been
seeing all campaign year long they're
not going to make up their mind and
probably until the closing week of this
campaign these two candidates still have
to earn those votes in the next two
debates and every day between now and
that first Tuesday in November there's
no deep abiding passion for these two
men Tom and if you take the undecideds
and the soft support we still have so we
saw tonight one of every four voters who
still they want to watch the next two
debates that's good news for us
that's right indeed about 40% of the the
voters in this country are for one
candidate or the other and then that
critical 20% in between I think is kind
of a meal like it keeps moving around
and breaking up into different parts and
then reforming itself and that's life
likely to be the dynamic between now and
Election Day five weeks away
NBC's Lisa Myers is the captain of our
Truth Squad here tonight she was keeping
track of all the various claims that
were made by the two candidates we're
gonna ask her if she can to do a kind of
a political accounting for us tonight
Lisa any wild exaggerations or
understatements well most certainly not
many understatements Tom our crack team
of political researchers and producers
have been working throughout the but the
debate checking the candidates facts did
they distort mislead say something less
than the full truth now both the
campaign's also have had their own truth
squads working overtime tonight on the
Internet at this hour the bush camp
claims Gore was less than truthful 27
times Gore Clegg the gore camp claims
the bush was less than truthful 16 times
as for our own team well what we found
is that both candidates took liberties
with the truth let's start on the issue
of the budget surplus because that's so
important I want to take one-half of the
surplus and dedicate it to Social
Security 1/4 of the surplus for
important projects and I want to send
1/4 of the sir
Plus back to the people who pay the
bills well that's not quite right it's
true the bush does set aside half the
surplus for Social Security but of the
remaining money about $2 or $3 goes for
tax cuts compared to every dollar he
spends for education prescription drugs
or new projects now let's look at what
Gore said taking issue with the charge
that he would use the surplus to
massively expand government under my
proposal for every dollar that I
proposed in spending for things like
education and health care I will put
another dollar into middle-class tax
cuts and for every dollar that I spend
in those two categories
I'll put $2 toward paying down the
national debt well that's not quite
right either
experts say Gore actually would put at
least $2 and do new government programs
for every dollar he spends on
middle-class tax cuts one more note on
the surplus Tom and that's a point you
and Tom and Tim made which is that
experts say that both of these
candidates grossly over promise and have
would spend a lot more money on taxes
and new programs than is likely to occur
in any future surplus now let's look on
the heat at the heated debate which
occurred on the issue of prescription
drugs 95 percent of all seniors would
get no help whatsoever under my pony's
plan for the first four or five years
wait a minute is just totally false for
him to stand up here and say that well
Bush is right that is false beginning
next year he would give 48 billion
dollars to the states to help as many as
9 million low-income seniors buy
prescription drugs that's many more than
the 5% Bush claims gore that Gore claims
Bush is gore is correct though that most
seniors under Bush's plan would have to
wait at least a couple of years for much
help in buying their prescription drugs
Tom thank you very much NBC's Lisa Myers
tonight the captain of our Truth Squad
once again
as she appears almost every election
year Tim that old seductress rosy
scenario is back and we'll have
additional coverage from here in Boston
in just a moment
[Music]
decision 2000 on MSNBC the choice is
yours tonight's debate is brought to you
by fidelity investments i will
capitalize on the potential of
tomorrow's promising companies many
promising companies are showing signs of
future success today growing earnings
and revenue are two things to look for
if you're willing to sue more risk you
may see higher returns the fidelity
growth company fund looks for companies
that have above-average growth potential
see what fidelity money management
excellence can do for you get the fact
kit today call 1-844-202-2727
well it's hard ass one lower prices
staples yeah we've got that
[Music]
the street in today's in that economy
companies are struggling to change
struggling with the complexities of
e-business with making intranets
extranets and the internet work together
across any platform around the world
well now it can all work together as one
[Music]
with net services software from Novell
the power to change
[Music]
we're back here in Boston we've seen the
conclusion out of this first debate 95
minutes altogether between Vice
President Al Gore and Texas Governor
George W Bush there is a continuing and
enduring tradition after these debates
it's called the spin room where
political correspondents and pundits
gather and then they are spun in a
matter of speaking by the advisers and
those people who are friendly to the two
candidates let's go now first to NBC's
Claire Shipman who of course had been
covering Vice President Al Gore's
campaign there what's the spin out of
there tonight
well time the spinners are indeed out in
full force and on both sides surprise
surprise and everybody's claiming it was
a victory and it was obviously there was
no real obvious winner and I think
you're going to hear back from everybody
behind me that they think their guy won
my interpretations are talking about
Vice President Gore is the following
what he really really wanted to do
tonight was stay focused on the issues
try to try to swamp
george w bush with facts they feel he
did that and he did do that for the most
part didn't want him to go negative he
tried to avoid that in fact even turn
the tables on bush saying you're the one
who attacked my character and
credibility I'm not going to do that so
that's what they're saying so far
alright thanks very much Claire Shipman
David Gregory is covering the Bush
campaign David anybody whispering
anything in your ear from the Bush
campaign at this point well you know
there was always a feeling their biggest
expectation would be that if it was even
coming in that after this debate it'd be
even coming out and I think that a lot
of them are gonna feel that that
expectation was met by Governor Bush
tonight he had a crucial test had to
prove that he was up to the job there
were a lot more questions about Governor
Bush than about the vice president in
this particular arena and certainly what
the spinners are saying and what was
plainly obvious is that the Texas
governor did have a grasp on balance of
these issues that were debated tonight
who is a serious exchange between the
two of them and that's going to be seen
as a victory
thanks very much NBC's David Gregory and
in Kentucky tonight the Democratic vice
presidential candidate Joe Lieberman is
already in place preparing for his
debate in Danville on Thursday night
against former of Wyoming Congressman
Dick Cheney let me begin with you if I
can senator Lieberman by asking if you
were surprised that that George W Bush
was on the defensive for the first 30
minutes or so when it came to this whole
question of the size of his tax cut well
it was surprising but I think what
happened here tonight is that Al Gore
was very strong very factual very fair
and very presidential and that is what I
think Governor Bush was in fact on the
defensive for a good part of the debate
tonight governor Bush never really
responded to Al Gore's contention which
is a fact that 43% of the Bush tax cut
goes to the top 1% of the American
people and of course that's not fair and
not the way to invest the surplus and
continuing our prosperity making it work
for more of America's families I thought
the vice president was superb tonight
I'm proud to be his running mate I
thought he was great I'm somehow not
surprised to hear all that Senator
Lieberman well of course I'm trying to
be very dispassionate in my judgment
we'll see it was already Exodus but
already the Bush campaign is saying how
can Vice President Al Gore and Joe
Lieberman say that they're best equipped
to reform campaign finance in America
given what we've been through in the
last eight years and didn't governor
Bush score points when he said if you
wanted to do something about
prescription drugs if you wanted to do
something about social security you've
had two terms in which to do it
well on campaign finance the important
thing to say is only Al Gore and I
support Republican John McCain and
Democrat Russ Feingold's campaign
finance report reform bill George Bush
opposes it and will veto it if it passes
on on the promises made listen this last
eight years has been a time when we've
turned deficits into surpluses when
we've cut the crime rate when order
reform welfare this has been I think
you'd have a hard time finding many
people in America who would say to
answer Ronald Reagan's question if
they're not better off now than they
were eight years ago is there more to do
of course there is and this surplus
allows us to do some of the things that
we've not been able to do before like
give a good solid prescription drug
benefit through Medicare to our senior
citizens
senator Lieberman thank you very much
for being with us tonight it was to
honor part in the debate on Thursday
night is Dick Cheney he's in Montgomery
Ohio at this moment and he has watched
all of this let me ask you mr. Cheney
was there any moment in this debate when
you raised your voice to the television
set toward Al Gore yes there was a
matter of fact there was Tom but I
[Music]
those those are private moments and in
the Stone and spirit of wanting to
create a new tone in Washington I prefer
to talk about my great pride in what to
George Bush didn't and I thought he was
very effective I was surprised that it
took the governor's 75 minutes to raise
the cost of the gore campaign proposals
that he's been putting out there with us
for you mean the campaign finance
question no not the campaign finance
question the whole cost of the many
programs that the vice president put
forward
well there's there there's a lot to talk
about we'll probably hear more about
that in the next two debates but the
fact that the Senate Budget Committee
has counted up all of the gore promises
and by their calculation they've already
spent 900 billion dollars more than will
have in the total surplus in the next 10
years
after tonight what is going to be your
top priority when you debate Joe
Lieberman on Thursday night in Danville
Kentucky it's a tremendous opportunity
tom to get access to millions of
Americans to have the opportunity to
talk about what we want to do as a
ticket Governor Bush and myself if we're
successful I'm sure Joe and and will do
an effective job on behalf of the
Democrats in terms of laying out their
proposals but there really are major
differences here and hopefully there are
millions of Americans out there who are
gonna engage thinking about how they
want to vote now as we come down to the
closing weeks of the campaign and the
debate I think will be an important part
of helping helping lay out those choices
do you think that you're getting
traction in your campaign on this whole
attack on military preparedness on the
part of the clinton-gore administration
or are you putting yourself in a
perilous position when the Vice
President can say listen we have the
best trained military in the world and
our adversaries must know that well
there's no question but what I have
enormous respect for the US military Tom
after all I led them for four years
through Desert Storm and and at the end
of the Cold War the fact of the matter
is though that all the trend lines are
in the wrong direction and while we're
very strong today we cannot maintain
that strength if we can't retain the
first class force we have to get people
who want to re-enlist for example we've
got to have modern equipment we've got
to provide the troops with the resources
they need to do the job we asked them to
do for us and that has not been
happening now there's a reason why
general Chuck croolik Commandant of the
Marine Corps
Ron Fogelman Air Force chief of staff
Jason Chief of Naval Operations all of
these men recently retired now private
citizens have endorsed Governor Bush and
myself even though they were all
appointed on Bill Clinton and Al Gore's
watch the fact of the matter is anybody
who has family today serving in the US
military knows we're in trouble knows we
need to turn it around and this is an
important issue in this campaign thanks
very much Dick Cheney we'll be watching
you on Thursday night from Danville
Kentucky in your debate against Joe
Lieberman thanks Tom
Tim Russert it seems to me that the most
instructive voices that we heard tonight
were in Tampa Florida with Sarah James
the undecided voters who were not moved
dramatically one way or the other I
suppose if we did a quick count looking
at that again more of them said they
thought that that Governor Bush won the
debate tonight than did Al Gore but none
of them seem to be terribly enthusiastic
about either man they're gonna wait and
see they're not locked in this race is
still very fluid and wide open tom
it's curious because George Bush knew he
went into this debate likeable but he
wanted to be perceived as more
knowledgeable Al Gore knew he was
perceived as knowledgeable rondalee that
come out of debate more likeable Bush
had approved capacity to govern Gore had
approved character to govern those
undecided voters going to tell us who
succeeded tonight we're not so it's
still not clear and that's what's so
wonderful about this process about these
debates and that what makes presidential
politics so exciting not just for all of
us who do this but for all of you as
well because after all it's our common
future at stake Thursday night Danville
Kentucky the next week in Wake Forest
and then we go to Washington University
in st. Louis I'm Tom Brokaw for all of
us at NBC News thank you for joining us
the first debate of campaign 2000